--- Page 1 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 1
ISSN: 2288-7709 © 2020 KODISA & ICMA.
http://www.icma.or.kr
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.20482/jemm.2020.8.2.1
Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive 
Literature Review* 
Ryan HATCHER1, Yosung HWANG2
Received: March 17, 2020. Revised: March 25, 2020. Accepted: March 30, 2020.
Abstract 
Purpose: The rise of the phrase Work Life Balance was bought up in 1986 when amid many Americans there was prevalence of 
detrimental work place practices like neglecting families, leisure activities and friends in order to achieve their study place goals. The 
significance of work-life balance has been gaining ground in recent years to grasp a wider range of groups, including students. 
Searching and finding a balance can be complex and challenging for many individuals and students. Research design, data and 
methodology: Through this paper we will explore how students balance the competing demands of work, study, and social activities. 
Several factors have increased imbalances within Educational organizations, and technology specifically has been influential. However,
technology also provides a novel solution to this organizational performance management issue. A Study-Life Optimization model 
(SLO) is suggested, which incorporates information systems, analytics, and decision support into a Smart Service System. A general 
framework for this model, detailing data collection, measurement, and ethical issues is explained briefly. Results: Outcomes include 
improved WLB, greater perceived quality of life, and increased Educational organizational performance. Conclusions: This paper 
contributes to the relevant literature as it pays attention to the various students’ of varying lifestyles school-work-personal lives. 
Findings of this study will provide a meaningful of the Work/school-life balance issues faced by students. The research could be helpful 
to the various stakeholders of a University, the curriculum designers, program coordinators etc. 
Keywords :Study-life Optimization, Big Data, Analytics, Higher Education
JEL Classification Code : M1
1. Introduction and literature review12
For efficient functioning of one‟s life, it is essential to 
acquire optimum balance between the different roles one 
plays on a daily basis. A student has a variety of roles: a 
partner, worker, friend, classmate, etc. The Work 
Foundation has defined WLB as: 
“Work-life balance is about people having a measure of 
control over when, where and how they work. It is achieved 
 
* This work was supported by Hannam Universiy Research Grant 
2019 for Yosung Hwang
1First Author. Assistant Professor, Department of General Education, 
Professor Hannam University, Korea
Email: savingryan@gmail.com
2 Corresponding Author or Second Author, Professor, Dept. of 
Management, Hannam University, Korea. 
when an individual’s right to a fulfilled life inside and 
outside paid work is accepted and respected as the norm, to 
the mutual benefit of the individual, business and society.” A 
large concentration of energy only on academics can affect 
personal relationships. Similarly , over indulgence in 
relationships at the expense of one’s academics or work can 
be counterproductive for student’s overall performance, 
which again impacts the individual and his various 
relationships. Hence it is crucial to strike optimum college 
and life balance. Work-life balance thus refers to, "The extent 
Email: yshwangg@daum.net
ⓒ Copyright: The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://Creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) 
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited.

--- Page 2 --2 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
to which individuals are equally involved in-and equally 
satisfied with-their work role and their family / personal role 
(Greenhause & Allen, 2011]. College-life balance is 
important for optimal academic functioning. Students often 
prioritize academics at the detrimental cost of personal 
factors, including relationships and exercise. This can lead to 
a decrease in academic performance, as overall health and 
well-being are critical to optimal academic functioning. The 
quality of student’s relationships can determine the health of 
student’s school/life balance. A large focus on school work 
can cause anguish in personal relationships, minimizing 
students sense of support. Similarly , a focus of attention with 
relationship issues at the expense of academics or work 
issues can be detrimental to performance, which can put 
further pain on the individual and the relationship. Finding 
ways to integrate school and personal life is vital 
2. Study-life optimization: Theoretical 
background
Focus to issues of work-life balance has been primarily 
prompted by demographic changes in the workforce 
(Beauregard & Henry , 2009; Brus, 2006; Kamenou, 2008). 
To date, research on work-life balance has been conducated 
in various contexts including, but not limited to, the medical 
field (Keeton, Fenner, Johnson, & Hayward, 2007), 
construction industry (Watts, 2009), and corporate America 
(Hobson, Delunas, & Kesic, 2001). Moreover, and related to 
this research, work-life balance has been investigated in 
higher education (Bardoel, De Cieri, & Santos, 2008; Brus, 
2006; Byron, 2005; Marshall et al., 2012; Moyer et al., 1999; 
Rosser, 2004; Sallee, 2008; Stimpson & Filer, 2011). In 
education, work-life has become a topic of import, so much 
that “over the past decade, work-family balance policies 
have become a popular [faculty] recruitment tool for research 
universities” (Sallee, 2008, p. 81). However, although worklife balance has materialized as a topic of study and stimulus 
for policy initiatives in higher education, few studies have 
considered student work-lives.
The constant battle to balance work and life are sources of 
stress/pressure for students (Brus, 2006; Mason, Goulden, & 
Frasch, 2009; Offstein et al., 2004). Consequently, in 
addition to compelling students to drop out, the intersection 
of work and life has pushed students to change their 
professorial aspirations (Mason et al., 2009). Decisions 
surrounding their personal life have also been influenced by 
the study journey (Mason et al., 2009). For example, doctoral 
students often decide to postpone having children (Mason et 
al., 2009). Although work-life balance is a widely researched 
field (Byron, 2005), minimal studies have explored the 
experiences of students (Stimpson & Filer, 2011). While 
taking this into account the struggle that students often 
experience in balancing their academic and personal lives 
(Brus, 2006).
2.1. Impact of study-life balance on 
optimazation
Those who have a better control of balance in their lives 
will have more positive overall work-life balance, subjective 
wellbeing, and work/ non-work life satisfaction (Grawitch, 
Maloney , Barber, \and Mooshegian, 2013, p. 281; Gropel, 
Kuhl, 2009, p. 369). Achieving one's life balance can come 
from their own techniques, or programs offered by their 
employers. Studies have shown that even when employees 
do not use the work-life balance services, simply being 
offered to them and knowing they are available helps to 
increase one's work-life balance (e.g., Zheng et al. 2015, p. 
369, 372 ).
College students who deal with high stress often say they 
wish they had more time; but maybe time is not the answer. 
Maybe, what students in college need is to learn to balance 
their multiple demands. Those who feel they have enough 
time to sufficiently complete their work, goals and self- care 
are often the happiest people. Boundaries and self -control 
are two ways to take on board time management. Duckworth 
and Seligman (2006) define self- control as the ability to 
suppress prepotent responses in the service of a higher goal' 
(p. 199; as cited in Kuhnle, Hofer, & Kilian, 2010, p. 252). 
Self -control is required to uphold and maintain boundaries. 
Conversely , Bulger, Matthews and Hoffman (2007) found 
that although boundaries are essential to be made and 
implemented for a well- rounded life style, they also need to 
be flexible (p. 365).
These two ideas coincide because traditional values, of 
school and work, are not diminishing. Though emotional and 
physical health care are two values that are starting to 
become just as vital as school and work, leaving less time 
and resources to be focused on any one value (Kuhnle, Hofer, 
& Kilian, 2010). Meaning that those who are happier or wish 
to be happier with their lives should develop enough selfcontrol to uphold the boundaries they make, yet be flexible 
enough to make the appropriate changes to their schedule or
lifestyle when needed.
College students were found to give attention and work 
around the most important goal or value at the present time. 
Meaning that the students would have to have the selfcontrol to prioritize according to the most demanding goal or
value at the time and focus on it until they could move on to 
the next one (Kuhnle, Hofer, & Kilian, 2010, p. 254). 
Similarly, it was found in a study that those who had higher 
work enhancement were those who had flexible work and 
personal schedules (Bulger, Matthews, & Hoffman, 2007, p. 
371). Work enhancement is defined as when one's job 
improves their mood in their personal life (Bulger, Matthews, 
& Hoffman, 2007, p. 369). Although previous studies have 
looked into values, boundaries, goals, and flexibility, within

--- Page 3 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 3
current knowledge no published study has explored the 
school work life balance of college students.
Besides their roles at work, individuals are also sons and 
daughters, siblings, friends, members of social organizations, 
and eventually spouses/partners and then parents, with the 
relative importance of these work- and nonwork roles 
changing and varying in importance through the life stages 
(Demerouti et al. , 2012). For instance, the importance of 
social life and hobbies may give way to family 
responsibilities as a person commits to a life partner and the 
couple has children. Research recognizes that work and 
personal life domains can impact one another in positive and 
negative ways (Carlson et al., 2000, 2006; Grawitch et al., 
2010). For instance, individuals experience conflict when 
aspects of work such as stressful relationships with managers 
or coworkers or long unpredictable work hours make it 
difficult to manage family time; or when caring for family 
reduces efficiency at work. Enrichment results when 
fulfillment at work (e.g., self-esteem, financial security) and 
transfer of skills, behaviors, and perspectives at work help a 
person be a better family member; or when the need to attend 
to family provides workers with focus and sense of urgency 
that result in greater efficiency at work. Work–life balance is 
thus defined as feeling effective and satisfied in both work 
and personal life domains (Greenhaus and Allen, 2011). 
Individuals try to minimize or manage conflicts between 
work and nonwork, and to maximize the benefits that spill 
over from work to nonwork and vice versa (Kalliath and 
Brough, 2008). As individuals’ roles in the work force and in 
the family change with time, different aspects of work–life 
balance take priority.
Traditional college students today belong to the 
Millennial generation. Millennials, compared with Boomers
and Gen-X, tend to place more value on jobs that “leave a lot 
of time for other things in life” (Twenge et al., 2010). That 
study was based on surveys of STEM workers taken when 
they were still attending high school and showed that 
Millennials’ desire for better work–life balance starts long 
before they consider having children. In part of a worldwide 
survey of Millennials (National Chamber Foundation, 2012), 
it was evident that members of this group were willing to 
work hard but also wanted work–life balance. For residents 
from Canada and the United States, the top answer to the 
question “If you could prioritize your life, what would you 
emphasize?” was “To spend time with my family,” with 56–
60% making this choice compared with 35% choosing “To 
have a successful career.” “To be able to have time to enjoy 
my hobbies” and “To have many good friends” were selected 
by <25% of the North American respondents, showing the 
greater importance of balancing work with family rather than 
with personal interests.
Family role models are major influences on young 
people’s attitudes toward work (Loughlin and Barling, 2001). 
College students who grew up in a family in which both 
parents shared housework and child care had lower 
anticipation of work–family conflicts and stronger selfeffiicacy , that is, belief they could manage both work and 
family , compared with students who had grown up in 
traditional households in which their mothers did most of the 
housework and caring for children (Cinamon, 2006). 
Because work–life balance is in part dependent on the type 
of work a person does, a young person’s perception of future 
work–life balance may have some influence on the person’s 
career decisions. Self-efficacy, defined as a person’s beliefs 
concerning his/her ability to perform a task or behavior 
successfully, influences career choices by determining the 
types of career exploration that the person will attempt and 
results in higher levels of persistence when faced with 
obstacles (Betz, 2004). Inasmuch as a person anticipates lack 
of future work–life balance as an obstacle to a desired career, 
having a concept of oneself forging a career while enjoying 
family life contributes to self-efficacy with respect to work–
life balance; and self-efficacy with regard to work–life 
balance has been shown to actually result in lower levels of 
conflict between work and nonwork (Fouad et al. , 2012). 
Such self-concept can be developed by exposure to positive 
role models (Gibson, 2003).
Concept of Work-life balance is not restricted to single 
country or industry rather it is a prevailing concept in many 
nations and across all occupations (Akdere, 2006). The 
author examines (Lee & Koeske,2004) the concept of 
worklife balance. Work–life balance has been explained as 
feeling productive and satisfied in both work and personal 
life spheres (Greenhaus and Allen, 2011). With exponential 
rise in competition in almost all spheres of one‟s life 
imbalance has become quite common concept in everyone‟s 
life. A quality life is shaped both by „aspects of daily life‟
and the level of satisfaction derived from these aspects 
(Camporese, Freguja and Sabbadini 1998).Having an 
acceptable leisure life is important. Indeed, research has 
shown that the so-called „personcentred‟ attribute of leisure, 
that is satisfaction with leisure, exhibits the strongest 
correlations with reported quality of life (Lloyd and Auld 
2002). Ziedner, found out that students are more stressed due 
to their academic workload and work pressures, whereas 
personal and social factors have less impact on student’s 
stress. Clift and Thomas (1983) observed that there are large 
amount of course work assignment that are given to the 
students and that lead to stress. There are many 
disadvantages associated with work life imbalances among 
students and it impact student‟s personal and professional 
lives. Author (Lazurus, 1998) suggested that factors such as 
the number of friends, financial satisfaction, perceived 
discrimination etc. affect the student satisfaction level. Kaiwen suggested that male students feel stronger stress related 
to family factor in comparison to the females; students who

--- Page 4 --4 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
are in higher grades feel more stress from mental/physical/ 
school and emotional factors. In addition to this, students 
who take a student loan also feel more stress than those who 
do not. Suicide among students is increasing nowadays and 
the major reason behind the suicide is work-life conflict. 
Engineering and science students also face difficulty in 
maintaining their personal and social life (Lee et.al. 2001). 
Psychology students also face study-life imbalance owing to 
the nature of study and experiments they are required to 
undertake. It has also been concluded that all such courses 
which include vocational training leads to stress and studylife imbalance.
Students juggling work in addition to competing 
obligations from school and home may experience greater 
challenges in striking a balance. In this case it is even more 
crucial that students are adept at attending to different roles 
and setting priorities. 
On the other hand, part time students work more and they 
earn more money in comparison to full time students. Thus, 
there is lack of balance between study, work and life among 
students and this leads to stress, bad performance, health 
problems etc. (Kai-Wen, 2003) Various dimensions of the 
work/life/study balance were discovered by Gayle and Lowe 
(2007) for higher education students who were studying at 
an education college. It was found that a specific set of 
work/life/study challenges present themselves to these 
students. 
Striking a balance between personal and academic 
components of students‟ lives has been identified as helpful 
for successful degree completion. From review of literature 
it was found that a there has been little to no research that has
been conducted on students of higher education on aspiring 
to acquire good School-Work-Life Balance. In this paper we 
explore and analyze the balance and issues in school-worklives. According to Stimpson and Filer (2011), “work-life 
balance is a topic discussed more frequently in the literature 
concerning faculty than graduate students in higher 
education” 
Further, most of the studies on students‟ work life balance 
has been conducted in western countries (e.g. Warren 2004; 
Robotham 2001; Clark, Raffe& Lee, J. S., Koeske, G. F., & 
Sales, E.; Kai-Wen. (2003). Work-life balance amid students 
is an evolving phenomenon in India, received less focus and 
has very important implications for the all the stakeholders 
of universities, vis a via students, faculty, employees etc. 
This sets the emerging point of the current research of 
school-work-life balance amid different streams and types of 
students.
The objective of the research framework is to identify the 
factors affecting school-work-personal life balance.
Study-life balance (SLB) is broadly described as a 
balancing, or dividing time between what you are engaged in 
at school and what you would like to be doing outside of 
school. People conveniently simplify SLB to mean less work 
and more play, and look at their time sheets to decipher 
where they can fit in more leisure time without being subject 
to any negative work consequences. However, as the theories 
surrounding SLB have been studied and developed, it has 
become apparent that it’s more complex, and that “Balance 
means that nothing is absolutely static and unchanging –
routines cannot be rigid and unchangeable” (Bowling, 
Eschleman, & Wang, 2010). Life is generally fluid, or ever 
changing, and so SLB is also ever changing. As our 
understanding of the complexity of work-life balance begins 
to increase, the impacts that it has within educational 
organizations becomes more apparent and susceptible to 
manipulation. Study-Life optimization is not simply 
studying less and reducing study related stress, but it may 
mean for some actually putting a little more effort in at 
school.
Technology has further heightened the issues of studylife balance in recent years, providing accessibility to 
students and Education Professionals 24-7, and blurring the 
lines between study and home responsibilities. For some this 
may lead to the justification of being less diligent when at 
work, and for others it may mean not having time to 
decompress from study related issues. Luckily, technology 
can also provide a unique and novel solution through 
utilizing information systems, analytics, and decision 
support. The wealth of data that is now available through 
conventional systems and complex mining techniques, 
coupled with the ability to analyze more complex data in 
larger quantities, and in real time allows us to go beyond 
describing and responding to issues. There is a distinct 
advantage to Educational organizations that are more 
“predictive” and “prescriptive” in their decision making 
(Banerjee, Bandyopadhyay , & Acharya, 2013).. The concept 
of using technology in this way to improve SLB and 
academic performance is an aspect of what we term StudyLife Optimization (SLO). Computers provide the channel to 
not only provide meaning from the vast data resources 
available, but they also provide the means to develop a Smart 
Service System aimed at SLO. Educational Organizations, 
equipped with SLO will be able to implement interventions 
through methods, like increasing awareness and social 
support, to address issues before they become headaches for 
Educational organizational management, and decrease 
organizational performance overall (Halbesleben, 2006; 
Lyumbomirsky , S. 2008).
Work life-balance is associated most often with 
employment, but the same principles apply to educational 
institutions with little translation needed. As the demands of 
the school environment increase and the available resources 
do not, or are seen as insufficient, students are more likely to 
experience burnout, a common sign of work-life imbalance 
(Salmela-Aro & Upadyaya,2014). Stressors students

--- Page 5 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 5
experience like academic responsibilities, classmates, and 
debt have a workplace counterpart. Students report that one 
of the major forces that interferes with their optimal 
performance is their work/school-life balance [El-Ghoroury , 
Galper,, Sawaqdeh,& Bufka, 2012). The impacts of SLB 
extend beyond the typical educational institution, and 
therefore the benefits of improving SLB also have wider 
reach than the traditional definition stated at the beginning of 
this paper may lead one to believe.
It is appropriate to define work-life conflict in order to 
better understand what WLB means, the existing conflict 
driving the need for better balance and optimization. The 
typical individual has several categorized areas of their lives 
that place demands on their time and resources, one of those 
being paid employment for individuals within the workforce. 
Work-life, or work-family, conflict is typified as a 
bidirectional inter-role conflict between the different domain 
areas of an individual’s life, and the demands within those 
areas. It is theorized by Jex & Britt (2014) that the conflicts 
between these domains can be classified into three major 
categories: Time -based conflict, strain-based conflict, and 
behavior based conflict (Jex, & Britt, 2014).].
Time- based conflict is perhaps one of the more objective 
areas of conflict. The specific behaviors and cognitive 
processes that occur in the different life domains require time, 
hours in the day, and these hours are limited no matter how 
hard the 24 hour limit is pushed. When activities in different 
domains interfere with the time that can be spent in other 
domains then conflict ensues. Strain- based conflict occurs 
when strains in one domain cause issues within another. For 
example, a parent stays up all night with their small child 
who has an upset stomach, and the parent gets no sleep. The 
lack of sleep would be considered a strain on the individual. 
The next day at work the person has a hard time staying 
awake and focusing in the afternoon staff meeting. Examples 
extend beyond sleep and may include mental, emotional, and 
physical issues. The strain from one area causes issues, or 
conflict in the other areas. Behavior-based conflict is slightly 
more complex. The activities and domains of our lives 
require different roles to be performed by the individual. 
They may include such titles as coworker, manager, leader, 
parent, sibling, friend, citizen, etc. A manager may have to 
enforce strict policies on media use in the workplace, but 
continuing to perform that role while at the church social 
later that evening will probably not play out favorably. 
Switching between the behaviors expected with each role is 
not easy, and so conflict sometimes follows (Jex, & Britt, 
2014). As stated previously, these conflicts are bidirectional, 
so in which sphere the conflicts manifest themselves differs 
between individuals. However, conflicts that appear in one 
sphere often create feedback loops, affecting the other 
spheres over time. These conflicts affect a wide range of 
individuals, with estimates ranging from 25 -50 % of 
working individuals (Bellavia, & Frone,2005).
WLB is the idea of prioritizing the different domains a 
person has, and devoting the appropriate time and resources 
to manage and minimize conflict between the domains (Jex,
& Britt, 2014). Within organizations there are several telltell signs that work-lifeimbalances are occurring. Higher 
turnover, absenteeism, burnout, decreased employee job 
satisfaction, decreased engagement at work, and decreased 
performance are some of the ways organizations are 
impacted the most (Bowling, Eschleman, & Wang, 2010) As 
previously mentioned, a significant number of employees 
and employers have reported issues that relate to WLB, and 
WLB issues have increased over time (CCH Incorporated. 
2007). The number of individuals reporting such issues may 
be increasing due to shifts in the workforce, and what 
domains of life are considered important or of higher priority 
to different generations.Why exactly would it be important 
for an organization to be concerned about work-life balance 
and optimization? Lowe (2006) points to some of the 
challenges facing companies in the 21 st century (Lowe, 
2006).. The workforce is currently aging, creating talent gaps 
that may slow or even halt company progress. The labor 
market is also growing increasingly competitive as 
globalization begins to affect even small businesses. 
Technology is opening up greater possibilities for when, 
where, and how we work, and the rising benefit costs puts 
pressure on organizations to cut any unnecessary funding. 
Organizations that develop tunnel vision on short term gains 
and profits may sacrifice employee recruitment, retention, 
engagement, and finally, long-term productivity. In order to 
gain an institutional competitive advantage in today’s market, 
companies must invest in their human capital. WLB must be 
part of that investment, providing a competitive advantage 
through maintaining employee engagement which will 
increase retention and talent acquisition, decrease 
absenteeism, and ultimately drive the productivity and 
profitability of organizations. In Canada, 600 employers 
were surveyed concerning common human resource issues, 
and 36 percent of human capital issues were workload/WLB 
related, closely followed by 32 percent related to employee 
stress which is not entirely a separate issue from WLB. 
However, less than 1/3 of employers did anything to address 
these primary issues. From 1991-2001 reported 
dissatisfaction with work-life balance increased by 3.3 
percent, from 16.7 to 20 percent. As dissatisfaction increases, 
commitments to organizations decrease, turnover increases, 
absenteeism increases, burnout increases, and productivity 
plummets. One in five employees surveyed reports being 
dissatisfied with their current WLB, and some of them are 
seeking changes, or changing companies, in order to address 
their dissatisfaction. For the sake of further clarifying the 
degree to which WLB may be an issue, if we were to 
generalize the findings of these previous studies to the labor 
force of the United States, approximately 31.4 million

--- Page 6 --6 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
individuals in the US would be dissatisfied with their WLB 
(April 2015 Labor Force = 157,072,000 people according to 
the US Bureau of Labor Statistics). 31.4 million Americans 
could have a higher chance of being less committed to their 
organization, are more likely to leave a company, are more 
likely to be absent, burnt out, and be less productive. That is 
no small number, and anything that could be done to impact 
that number would have immense benefits for the country 
and individual corporations. Approx. 10.2% of the entire US 
population would have an issue with WLB (US population 
May 2015 = 320,931,00, US Census Bureau).CCH (2007) 
found that in 1995, approx. 46 percent of reported absences 
were due to family issues, personal needs, or stress, not 
personal illness. That is a very large number of absences 
were accounted for by factors that are connected to WLB, a 
number that is connected to immense costs for organizations 
in lost productivity. In 2007, 53 percent of absences reported 
were for the same reasons. This would suggest that work-life 
balance issues are increasing over time. Duckworth and 
Buzzanell (2009) state that this is because work demands are 
increasing, resources are stagnant or decreasing, and roles
and expectations are changing. Work-life -balance is 
associated most often with employment, but the same 
principles apply to educational institutions with little 
translation needed. As the demands of the school 
environment increase and the available resources do not, or 
are seen as insufficient, students are more likely to 
experience burnout, a common sign of work-life imbalance 
(Salmela-Aro Upadyaya, 2014). Stressors students 
experience like academic responsibilities, classmates, and 
debt have a workplace counterpart. Students report that one 
of the major forces that interferes with their optimal 
performance is their work/school-life balance (El-Ghoroury, 
Galper,, Sawaqdeh,& Bufka, 2012).. Though the rest of this 
paper refers to factors or programs often associated with 
businesses, the argument is that these same factors and 
programs apply with minor contextual changes to 
educational institutions. The impacts of WLB extend beyond 
the typical workplace, and therefore the benefits of 
improving WLB also have wider reach than the traditional 
definition stated at the beginning of this paper may lead one 
to believe.
3. The SLO Model
The main purposes of WLO programs within an 
organization are to reduce work-life conflict, decrease 
turnover, improve company image and ability to attract talent, 
and improve performance. The understanding of the 
complex WLB system has improved greatly, along with the 
connected literature, over the past 15 years. There is still a 
vast amount of room for improvement, but the relationship 
between performance and WLB is better characterized now 
than ever before. Guest (2002) urges that the following areas 
of any WLB study should be considered: Determinants, 
Nature of the Balance, and Consequences/Impact. Under 
Determinants scientists and practitioners should consider 
Organizational Factors, including workplace demands and 
culture, and Individual Factors, including personality, gender, 
and work orientation. Under Nature of the Balance 
practitioners should know where the balance emphasis is 
placed, whether on work or activities outside of work, and 
what the interaction is between work and exterior to it. 
Finally, under Consequences/Impact performance, wellbeing, satisfaction and other impacts should be examined. 
Already it is clear that operationalizing SLB is more complex 
that simply surveying student’s attitudes, though that is part 
of the picture. Furthermore, where the balance is situated will 
vary widely from person to person, requiring that 
individualized input and experience common to smart 
systems.
There is a clear kind of flow of the three major areas 
Guest (2002) posits should be examined. What influences 
SLB, how is it actually defined from the objective and 
subjective point perspectives, and what outcomes are we 
likely to see. Beauregard & Henry (2009) conducted a 
thorough review of available SLB literature, and propose a 
path model that maps how some much more specific 
variables interact with SLB and what some of the specific 
predicted outcomes are (see Figure 2). These two sources 
provide a meaningful starting point for developing a stout 
theoretical model of WLB, and such a model is an integral 
part of SLO. A theoretical model is not enough however, and 
technology provides the ability to turn these theoretical 
models into models of practical predictive and prescriptive 
use, predictive referring to the ability to identify variables 
relevant to specific outcomes and prescriptive meaning the 
ability to prescribe interventions to change those outcomes. 
This can all be done through the smooth interfaces of smart 
apps. The process of developing a Smart Services System 
will require the testing and refining of the described 
relationships in order to provide a system with practical 
predictive validity.
4. The Role of Technology in Work-Life Balance
Technology has revolutionized the workplace in many 
positive ways, but also has begun to “morph the work and 
personal lives of working professionals into a single whole” 
(Dash, Anand, & Gangadharan, (2012), p. 52). It has created 
a means to provide more work flexibility and better WLB. 
However, it has also come to mean that for many employees 
the work week never ends. Deciding when, where, and how 
to be accessible is a major challenge for executives reports 
Groysberg and Abraham who interviewed about 4,000 
executives (2014). Progress in IT, information overload,

--- Page 7 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 7
need for speedy responses and constant availability , long 
work hours, and weekend shifts are shown to take a toll on 
the work-life balance of IT professionals (Goswami, 2014), 
and an additional weight is put on them to support the 
technologies being used at all times. Teleworkers, or 
employees working together in the virtual office, experience 
a unique amount of flexibility of when and where they work 
which gives them a unique WLB niche. In an older study by 
Hill, Miller, Weinter and Colihan (1998) they took 
advantage of an IBM initiative to transfer workers from 
traditional offices to teleworker positions. A qualitative 
analysis revealed that teleworkers reported perceptions of 
higher morale, greater flexibility, longer work hours, and 
more productivity, but also reported negative effects on 
teamwork. A quantitative analysis confirmed findings 
related to productivity and flexibility. Perceptions of WLB 
among telecommuters and those still in traditional offices 
though were mixed, and even negative. “It may be 
that…virtual office workers have more difficulty separating 
themselves from work. It may be that teleworkers must find 
new cues to let them know when it is time to quit” (p. 679). 
It turns out that in order to better understand the relationship 
between productivity and WLB, a more complex model of 
interactions must be developed. For example, Hill et al. 
recognize that gender and the presence of young children in 
the family interacted with productivity and WLB. This is 
where more recent advances in technology may start to 
provide a clearer benefit. Understanding the situational 
factors on individuals and entire communities has never been 
easier.Technology provides a solution to how to manage 
organizational performance through work-life balance 
initiatives by providing a method by which WLB models can 
be better generated, understood, refined, and applied. 
Companies like Pandora and Mint currently employ 
information systems, analytics, and decision support to 
provide services that are individualized for customers, their 
services (Layton, 2006). Pandora uses a complex algorithm 
to compare songs on thousands of traits and play songs that 
match what consumers have already given the thumbs up. 
The process that thy have established a very successful 
business on is summarized in Figure 1. Mint accesses bank 
account information, and keeps track of how much money 
you’ve made, spent, where you’ve spent it, and provides 
financial advice and services that are most pertinent to your 
habits. Organizations can use this same technology to the 
benefit of WLB and productivity, providing instead of better 
music or financial advice, necessary information to inform 
organizations WLB interventions and programs. One of the 
major services that these companies have been able to 
capitalize on are mobile applications, programs that adapt in 
real time, and provide a unique experience to the individual. 
These applications resemble and even rival the smart 
systems of Apple, Google, Microsoft, and other tech. giants. 
Likewise, it is feasible to develop such a system that adapts 
as the schedule, demands, and resources change that
Individuals have access to.
Figure 1: Pandora analytics model
5. Study-life optimization
SLO is designed to take the existing models of SLB and 
utilize information technology, study
analytics, and decision support for the benefit of managing 
academic performance within educational organizations, and 
direct SLB programs. Not only are there clear benefits to 
educational organizations, but individuals will benefit from 
greater engagement and fulfillment at school and beyond. As 
the discussion above indicates, the benefits of SLB programs 
may not be as intuitive or straightforward, and there are 
many characteristics
these programs should have to make them the most 
profitable. In order to better understand and influence a 
complex system there must be a means of analyzing an 
educational institution’s unique variables, and streamlining 
programs for efficiency and effectiveness. SLO will do just 
that for each unique Educational organization.
In its conceptualization the WLO project consists of:
1. A theoretical SLB model that is continually developed and 
revised similar to the analysis variables used by leading stock 
brokers. This model will be updated as the salience of new 
variables are identified, and as existing variables lose their 
predictive validity. This will ensure that the theoretical 
model is constantly being updated and optimized. Input from 
users in real time to the smart system will allow updates to 
be more fluid.
2. The theoretical model will inform database construction 
and management. There will be a set list of predefined 
variables that will be included in database construction, and
some considerations on data collection will follow hereafter.

--- Page 8 --8 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
3. For each individual Educational organization a needs 
analysis will be conducted concerning variables such as 
individual differences and educational culture. This will 
inform the development of the analytical prescriptive model. 
A base structure will be used for every educational institution, 
but the weight of some variables will need to be adapted at 
onset in order to make sure immediate implementation of the 
SLO will be successful.
4. Once the database, data collection procedures, and 
analysis model are in place, the SLO program will begin 
analyzing Education Institution SLB initiatives, and after 
some optimization, will be able to provide the institution 
with prescriptive suggestions of how to improve SLB of the 
educational institution members.
5. Individuals will have the opportunity to personalize the 
SLO system as they input their own information such as 
appointments or events. The system will begin to update and 
make unique suggestions to the individual to optimize their 
SLB in real time. Additional optional assessments andtools 
will be provided to further customize
the smart system.
6. The SLO will continue assessing the SLB of individuals 
within the organization aschanges are made and as the 
organization progresses, and continue to give decision 
makers the data and information they need to make important 
decisions to improve academic performance. Thus you get 
the input from the individual’s environment, and that of the
organization.
The SLO System meets that core characteristics of Smart 
Service Systems. The system will be able to update in real 
time using the advantages of machine learning to provide end 
users, the individual employee concerned and relevant 
company management, with an accurate assessment of the 
WLB for that individual and for the organization on a more 
macro level. Individuals will be able to see were conflicts 
may exist between the different domains of their lives, and 
will receive prompts on what potential conflicts to be aware 
of and how to improve their current situation. Employees 
will be able to update their profiles and schedules, and 
receive immediate feedback on the changes they have made. 
For example, a user could see how taking a few days off for 
vacation to the Bahamas without answering emails vs 
spending 30 minutes each morning and evening to do so 
would impact their WLB over the next couple of weeks, and 
then they could decide what is best for their vacation time. 
As new information becomes available to the system, it will 
be able to determine what added empirical value the 
information provides’ and incorporates it into the model.
The actual deliverables provided by the system will need 
to take a variety of forms. Various mediums will be utilized 
to provide real time suggestions and alerts to the appropriate 
parties such as desktop notifications and messages. Daily 
notifications can be provided to a select few such as
managers and spouses as specified by the company and 
targeted employee. Weekly stoplight reports will be 
provided to help provide a breakdown of which areas have 
seen strain over the last week, and how changes made in the 
name of optimization have impacted the week’s results. On 
a monthly basis a trend report will be provided with 
spotlights of key events, and a breakdown of next steps for 
greater study-life optimization. It will be strongly 
encouraged that WLO goals and relevant metrics also be 
included with annual and bi-annual performance review 
programs. Employees and managers alike will be able to 
improve their decision making with the additional cognitive 
assistance. Dashboards will be available for real time data 
manipulation, corporate analysis, and decision assistance.
Optimization is the driving of educational institutional 
productivity through managing SLB. The vision is to provide 
cognitive assistance to the individual employees of an 
organization, and to the concerned leadership. As demands 
are placed upon organizations to perform in fluid 
environments the system will able to provide real-time input 
that is unique to the situation and the combined contextual 
variables. Driving company productivity can be done in a 
socially responsible manner. As changes are made within the 
organization, those changes that are most effective will serve 
as a reinforcing feedback loop, and the assistance provided 
will become more and more accurate and in-tune with the 
organization’s needs. One challenge to the optimization 
system is that employee’s and organizations sometimes 
appear to be at odds in their desires, and so by optimizing we 
may alienate both parties to some degree. The purpose of this 
system will be to provide cognitive assistance and drive 
positive behavior change that will benefit all parties involved 
in the long-term. One of the primary arguments of 
organizational psychology, the science concerned with the 
study of SLB, is that by improving the lives of the students,
you will develop an organization with immense human 
capital and greater productivity. By investing and making 
positive social changes within the organization you will be 
improving work conditions, attracting greater talent, 
retaining employees, an further increase your human capital 
and drive productivity. 
Optimization is developing an upward SLB spiral within 
an organization and individual’s lives. Optimization is not 
the pitting of various objectives against each other, but 
instead strategically aligning objectives like employee 
satisfaction, compensation packages, and company profits to 
provide a unique advantage to the organization. Together 
these pieces come together to turn available data and theory

--- Page 9 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 9
into a practical tool. As was noted in the first paragraph of 
the paper, Burton (2004) said that “Balance means that 
nothing is absolutely static and unchanging – routines cannot 
be rigid and unchangeable”, and the SLO will be able to 
address to the fluidity of the organizations’ environment over 
time. 
Educational Organizations will need to front some initial 
investment, however the costs of maintaining the SLO 
system will be minimal, and in the future will incorporate 
other administration issues beyond SLB. The returns from 
such a system could include increased productivity (some 
companies reporting as much as a 10% increase from SLB 
initiatives), increased profits, increased shareholder returns 
(survey of Fortune 500 companies found a $60 million dollar 
gain per WLB initiative announcement per company), less 
burnout, increased reciprocity from employees, increased 
organizational commitment, increased return from 
recruitment efforts, and decreased turnover, as stated several 
times previously (Beauregard & Henry, 2009). It is 
important to stress that SLB is part of the fluid life 
experience, and will experience and ebb and flow. 
Sometimes less work, or distance from other responsibilities 
is not always the answer. Part of optimizing SLB is also 
optimizing productivity and engagement. In the end, 
organizations will see an increase in their bottom line as SLO 
is achieved.
Successful achievement of these goals will require the 
help, expertise, and support from a variety of disciplines, 
including psychology, sociology, linguistics, marketing,
finance, human resources, IT, peoole analytics, and many 
others. However, they will all be held together by 
information systems, analytics and decision support. SLO 
was conceived to, at the core, try to help people make more 
thoughtful decisions for their lives based on real data and 
collaborations through smart systems. As organizational 
initiatives, and individual initiatives like conflict 
management training, time management training, counseling 
services, increased social support inside and outside of workrelated activities, emphasis on employee development and 
work placement, etc. (Marques, 2005) are applied, 
organizations will be able to measure the benefits of studylife balance. The benefits have been outlined and repeated to 
make it clear what the return on WLB can be.
One of the key benefits to embarking on a global scaled 
project like this is that with more data, experience and 
research the WLO will not only be able to help people with 
the knowledge and theories that we have today, but it will be 
able to gather data on these issues in an unprecedented scale 
and help refine and develop new theories and interventions 
to make a significant difference in global well-being. This is 
a project that extends into the long term, several years to 
decades, as it improves, is invested in, and develops to add a 
unique application of study- Life Optimization through the 
use of smart service systems.
Study-life Optimization will provide a clear link between 
an organization’s productivity and the WLB of employees, 
and may be used to create an upward spiral of productivity 
and satisfaction. Such a Smart Service System is feasible, 
and could provide meaningful, unique cognitive assistance 
to students and leadership alike. This system meets the cries 
for educational social responsibility, and has immense valueadded potential.
6. Data Collection
Data is necessary to transform our theoretical model into 
a functional one, and there are many sources of common data 
that could be collected in an organization or transorganizational setting. In some cases this data can be easily 
collected or is already being collected, but some new sources 
of data can be utilized with appropriate sensors and 
permission. WLO is not meant to infringe upon the privacy 
and personal agency of individuals. The measures that will 
be available will be contextual dependent, the context being 
the organization and environment in which people live. Basic 
demographic information will be essential, specifically 
including data related to family structure, social support, 
SES, type of work, workplace characteristics, current work 
positions, etc. Other areas that would be of particular interest 
as sources of data are: Communication (every text, email, 
phone call, etc.), Financial (salary, bank statements, 
purchasing habits, debt, insurance, etc.), and Life Patterns 
(Detailed schedule, record of location, entertainment use, 
fitness and health, etc.). These would take the application of 
some new technologies and skills to mine the sources well, 
but the information would be extremely beneficial. HRIS and 
task management systems may be of particular benefit in 
providing informative data too for organizations. Also, 
several measures have been developed already to gain 
insights into more difficult constructs to measure such as 
burnout [30, 32]. A combination of several instruments will 
be used to look at some of the harder to measure constructs. 
Over time data will become more valuable and diverse. 
Additionally, the coaching algorithms will improve with 
time, and more data on each person and people similar to 
them will be built up and analyzed to make the project even 
more successful.
7. Ethical considerations
An ethical framework must be established in order to 
avoid potential issues that may arise via the use of individual 
data, Big Data, and Analytics. Intended consequences may 
not always occur, and unintended consequences may create

--- Page 10 --10 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
bigger issues like degrading positive workplace culture, or 
casting a negative organizational image. There are few 
authoritative decisions that have been made concerning the 
ethicality of some data collection methods, types of data that 
should be collected, and how it should be used for
organizational gain. Using uncensored personal data to 
inform important job decisions could introduce new 
employment litigations that no company would like to face 
[28]. Berdichevsky and Neunschwander (1999) lay out an 
ethical framework for Persuasive Technologies, where they 
set ground rules. Among the most important of the ground 
rules they outline is what they call the golden rule:
“The creator of a persuasive technology should never 
seek to persuade a person or persons of something they 
themselves would not consent to be persuaded to do.” (pp 52)
We propose going one step farther, utilizing SLO to not 
only build something to persuade them of what they would 
be willing to be persuaded of, but have the user set the goals 
or objective of the persuasion. We hope to move beyond the 
history of most technologies as more incidental, to one that 
is purposeful, and smart. One purpose of analytics is to step 
beyond descriptive data, and become more predictive and 
visionary. As the field continues to progress the lines 
between what can be done and what should be done are 
expected to become clearer. It is the prerogative of parties 
that have that ability to improve the human condition, like 
improving work8. Conclusion
The purpose of this paper is to describe the SLB construct 
by reviewing several theories, characterizing the possible 
implications of SLB, and describing SLB models. The 
impact of technology on SLB, both the good and bad, will be 
described. Finally a Smart Service System to optimize SLB 
is proposed, and data collection and ethical practices are 
explained.
Successful achievement of these goal will require the help, 
expertise, and support from a variety of disciplines and 
university departments, including psychology , sociology , 
linguistics, marketing, finance, human resources, IT, 
business analytics, and many others. However they will all 
be held together by information systems, analytics and 
decision support. SLO was conceived to, as the central focus, 
try to help people make more thoughtful decisions for their 
lives based on real data and collaborations through smart 
systems. As Educational organizational initiatives, and 
individual initiatives like conflict management training, time 
management training, counseling services, increased social 
support inside and outside of study-related activities, 
emphasis on student development and study placement, etc. 
[Marques2005] are applied, organizations will be able to 
measure the benefits of work-life balance. The benefits have 
been outlined and repeated to make it clear what the return 
on WLB can be. 
One of the key outcomes to conducting research on a 
global scaled project like this is that with more data, 
experience and research the SLO will not only be able to 
assist people with the knowledge and theories that we have 
today, but it will be able to gather data on these issues in an 
unprecedented scale and help refine and develop new 
theories and interventions to make a significant difference in 
global well-being. This is a project that extends into the long 
term, several years to decades, as it improves, is invested in, 
and develops to add a unique application of SLO through the 
use of smart service systems.
SLO will provide a clear and transparent link between an 
Educational organization’s productivity and the SLB of 
students and employees alike, and may be used to create an 
upward movement of productivity and satisfaction. Such a 
Smart Service System is feasible, and could provide 
meaningful, unique cognitive assistance to individuals and 
leadership alike. This system meets the demands for 
corporate social responsibility, and has immense valueadded potential.
References
Akdere, M. (2006). Improving quality of work-life: Implications for 
human resources. The Business Review, Cambridge,6 (1), 173177.
Ali, A., & Kohun, F. (2006). Dealing with isolation feelings in IS 
doctoral programs. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 1, 
21-33. Retrieved from http://ijds.org/Volume1/IJDSv1p021033Ali13.pdf 
Allen, T. D. (2001). Family-supportive work environments: the role 
of organizational perceptions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 
58(3), 414–435.doi:10.1006/jvbe.2000.1774.
Austin, A. E. (2002). Preparing the next generation of faculty: 
Graduate school as socialization to the academic careers. The 
Journal of Higher Education, 73(1), 94-122. 
Bair, C. R., & Haworth, J. G. (2005). Doctoral student attrition and 
persistence: A meta-synthesis of research. In J. C. Smart (Ed.), 
Higher education: Handbook of theory and research, Vol. 19
(pp. 481584). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Banerjee, A., Bandyopadhyay, T., & Acharya, P. (2013). Data 
analytics: Hped up aspirations or true potential? Vikalpa, 38(4), 
1-11.
Bardoel, E. A., De Cieri, H., & Santos, C. (2008). A review of worklife research in Australia and New Zealand. Asia Pacific 
Journal of Human Resources, 46(3), 316-333. 
Baum, S., Ma, J., & Payea, K. (2010). Education pays 2010: The 
benefits of higher education for individuals and society. New 
York, NY: The College Board.

--- Page 11 --Ryan HATCHER, Yosung HWANG / Journal of Economics Marketing, and Management Vol 8 No 2 (2020) 1-12 11
Beauregard, T. Z., & Henry, L. C. (2009). Making the link between 
work-life balance practices and organizational performance. 
Human Resource Management Review, 19, 9-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.hrmr.2008.09.001
Bellavia. G., & Frone, M. (2005). Work-family conflict. In J. 
Barling, E. K. Kelloway, & M. Frone (Eds.), Handbook of 
Work Stress, (pp. 113 ñ 147). Sage Publications: Thousand 
Oaks.
Berdichevsky, D., and Neunschwander, E. (1999). Towards and 
Ethics of Persuasive Technology.Communications of the ACM, 
42 (5), 51-58.
Boeije, H. (2002). A purposeful approach to the constant 
comparative method in the analysis of qualitative interviews. 
Quality & Quantity, 36, 391-409.
Bourke, S., Holbrook, A., Lovat, T., & Farley, P. (2004). Attrition, 
completion and completion times of PhD candidates. Paper 
presented at the AARE Annual Conference, Melbourne.
Bowling, N. A., Eschleman, K. J., & Wang, Q. (2010). A metaanalytic examination of the relationship between job 
satisfaction and subjective well-being. Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology, 83, 915-934. doi: 
10.1348/096317909X478557
Brus, C. P. (2006). Seeking balance in graduate school: A realistic 
expectation or a dangerous dilemma. New Directions for 
Student Services, 115,31-45. 
Burton, C. (2004). What does work-life balance mean anyway? The 
Journal for Quality & Participation, 27(3), 12-13.
Bulger, C., Matthews, R., & Hoffman, M. (2007). Work and 
personal life boundary management: Boundary strength, 
work/personal life balance, and the segmentation- integration 
continuum. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 12(4), 
365-375.
Byron, K. (2005). A meta-analytic review of work-family conflict 
and its antecedents. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67 , 169198
Carlson DS, Kacmar KM, Wayne JH, Grzywacz JG (2006). 
Measuring the positive side of the work–family interface: 
development and validation of a work–family enrichment scale. 
J Vocat Behav, 68, 131–164.
Carnevale, A., Smith, N., Melton, M., & Price, E. (2015). Learning 
while earning: The new normal. Retrieved from 
https://cew.georgetown.edu/wpcontent/uploads/WorkingLearn
ers-Report.pdf
Charmaz, K. (2000). Grounded theory: Objectivist and 
constructivist methods. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), 
Handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
CCH Incorporated. (2004). Work-life benefits. Journal of Tax 
Practice Management, 3, 18. CCH Incorporated. (2007). 2007 
CCH Unscheduled Absence Survey. Retrieved from 
https://www.cch.com/Absenteeism2007/
Clutterbuch, D. (2004). How to get the payback from investment in 
work-life balance. The Journal for Quality & Particpation, 27 
(3), 79-19.
Chimote, N. K., & Srivastava, V. N. (2013). Work-life balance 
benefits: From the perspective of organizations and employees. 
The IUP Journal of management Research, 12, 62-73.
Clift, J. C., and Thomas, I. D. (1983). Student workloads.Journal 
of Higher Education, (2), 447-460.
Council of Graduate Schools. (2008). Ph.D. completion and 
attrition: Analysis of baseline program data from the Ph.D. 
completion project. Washington, DC: Author.
Dash, M., Anand, V., & Gangadharan, A. (2012). Perceptions of 
work-life balance among IT professionals. The IUP Journal 
Organizational Behavior, 11, 51-65.
Davis, J. (2012). School enrollment and work status: 2011. 
American community survey, 2012. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/prod/20l3pubs/acsbr11-14.pdf
Di Pierro, M. (2007). Excellence in doctoral education: Defining 
best practices. College Student Journal, 41(2), 368-375. 
Drago, R., & Kashian, R. (2003). Mapping the terrain of 
work/family journals. Journal of Family Issues, 24(4), 488-512.
Duckworth, J. D., & Buzzanell, P. M. (2009). Constructing worklife balance and fatherhood: Men’s framing of the meaning of 
both work and family. Communication Studies, 60, 558-573. doi:
10.1080/10510970903260392
El-Ghoroury, N. H., Galper, D. I., Sawaqdeh, A., & Bufka, L. F. 
(2012). Stress, coping, and barriers to wellness among 
psychology graduate students. Training and Education in 
Professional Psychology, 6, 122-134. doi: 10.1037/a0028768
Gardner, S. K. (2009). Student and faculty attributions of attrition 
in high and low-competing doctoral programs in the United 
States. Higher Education, 58, 97-112. 
Gardner, S. K., & Gopaul, B. (2012). The part-time doctoral student 
experience. International Journal of Doctoral Studies. 7, 63-78.
Retrieved from 
http://ijds.org/Volume7/IJDSv7p063078Gardner352.pdf
Golde, C. M. (1998). Beginning graduate school: Explaining firstyear doctoral attrition. New Directions for Higher Education, 
101, 55-64. 
Golde, C. M. (2000). Should I stay or should I go?: Student 
descriptions of the doctoral attrition process. Review of Higher 
Education, 23(2), 199-227. 
Govendir, M., Ginns, P., Symons, R., & Tammen, I. (2009). 
Improving the research higher degree experience at the Faculty 
of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney. The Student 
Experience, Proceedings of the 32nd HERDSA Annual 
Conference, Darwin, 6(9), 163-172.
Goswami, S. (2014). Work-life conflict among IT professionals. 
The IUP Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13 (4), 38-59.
Grawitch, M., Maloney, P., Barber, L., & Mooshegian, S. (2013). 
Examining the nomological network of satisfaction with worklife balance. Journal ofOccupational Health Psychology, 18(3), 
276-284.
Gropel, P., & Kuhl, J. (2009). Work-life balance and subjective 
well-being: The mediating role of need fulfilment. British
Journal of Psychology, 1OO(Pt2),365-375.
Groysberg, B., & Abrahams, R. (2014). Mange your work, manage 
your life. Harvard Business Review, March,58-66.
Halbesleben, J. R. B. (2006). Sources of social support and burnout: 
A meta-analytic test of the conservation of resources model. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 91 , 1134-1145. doi: 
10.1037/0021-9010.91.5.1134
Hill, E. J., Miller, B. C., Wiener, S. P., & Colihan, J. (1998). 
Influences of the virtual office on aspects of work and work/life 
balance. Personnel Psychology, 51 , 667-693. doi: 
10.1111/j.1744-6570.1998.tb00256.x

--- Page 12 --12 Optimizing Study-life Balance within Higher Education: A Comprehensive Literature Review
Jex, S. M, & Britt T. W. (2014). Organizational psychology: A 
scientist-practitioner approach. Hobeken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.
Johnson, J., Rochkind, J., Ott, A., & DuPont, S. (2009). With their 
whole lives ahead of them. Public Agenda
Kai-Wen. (2003). A study of stress among college students in 
Taiwan. Journal of Academic and Business Ethics. 2, 1–8.
Kamenou, N. (2008). Reconsidering work-life balance debates: 
Challenging limited understandings of the ‘life’ component in 
the context of ethnic minority women’s experiences . British 
Journal of Management, 19, S99-S109. 
Keeton, K., Fenner, D. E., Johnson, T. R. B., & Hayward, R. A. 
(2007). Predictors of physician career satisfaction, work-life 
balance, and burnout. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 109 (4), 949955.
Kuhnle, C., Hofer, M., & Kilian, B. (2010). The relationship of 
value orientations, self-control, frequency of school-leisure 
conflicts, and life-balance in adolescence . Learning and 
Individual Differences, 20(3), 251-255.
Lambert, S. J. (2000). Added benefits: The link between work-life 
benefits and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of 
Management, 43, 801-815. doi: 10.2307/1556411
Layton, J. (2006). How Pandora Radio works. HowStuffWorks.com.
Retrived from
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/internet/basics/pandora .ht
m
Lee, J. S., Koeske, G. F., & Sales, E. (2004). Social support 
buffering of acculturative stress: A study of mental health 
symptoms among Korean international students. International 
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 28, 399-414.
Lewin, T. (2009). College dropouts cite low money and high 
stress. nytimes.com . Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/1 O/education/1 
Ograduate.html? _r=O
Lingard, H., Brown, K., Bradley, L., Bailey, C., & Townsend, K. 
(2007). Improving employees’ work-life balance in the 
construction industry: Project alliance case study. Journal of 
Construction Engineering and Management, 133, 807-815. doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2007)133:10(807)
Lowe, G. (2006). Under pressure: Implications of work-live 
balance and job stress. Human Solutions Report 2006-2007. 
Retrieved from http://www.grahamlowe.ca/documents/182
/Under%20Press ure%2010-06.pdf
Ludwig, L. (2014). Mint.com Review – Should I UseMint? 
InvestorJunkie.com. Retrieved from
http://investorjunkie.com/54/mint-com-review/
Lyumbomirsky, S. (2008). The How of Happiness: A New 
Approach to Getting the Life You Want. New York, NY: 
Penguin Press.
Lyumbomirsky, S. 2013. The Myths of Happiness: What Should 
Make You Happy, but Doesn’t; What Shouldn’t Make you 
Happy, but Does.New York, NY: Penguin Press.
Marques, J. (2005) HR’s crucial role in the establishment of 
spirituality in the workplace. The Journal of American Academy 
of Business, 7, 27-31.
Marshall, J. M., Brooks, J. S., Brown, K. M., Bussey, L. H., 
Fusarelli, B., Gooden, M. A., Lugg, C. A., Reed, L. C., & 
Theoharis, G. (Eds.). (2012). Juggling flaming chain saws: 
Faculty in educational leadership try to balance work and 
family. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Mesmer-Magnus, J. R., & Viswesvaran, C. (2006). How familyfriendly work environments affect work/family conflict: A metanalytic examination. Journal of Labor Research, 27, 555-574. 
doi: 10.1007/s12122-006-1020-1
Nahrgang, J. D., Morgeson, F. P., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). Safety 
at work: A meta-analytic investigation of the link between job 
demands, job resources, burnout, engagement, and safety 
outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 71-94. doi: 
10.1037/a0021484
Payne, D., and Landry, B. J. L. (2006). A Uniform Code of Ethics: 
Business and IT Professional Ethics. Communications of the 
ACM, 49 (11), 81-84.